Release notes for v0.1.15 (#1398)
VirtusLab/scala-cli: website/docs/release_notes.md

# Release notes

## [v0.1.15](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/releases/tag/v0.1.15)

> ## M1 native launcher is here! (experimental)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The M1 native launcher is here! (experimental)
```

> We are happy to announce that there is new dedicated launcher for M1 users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are happy to announce that there is a new dedicated launcher for M1 users.
```

Reviewer: Also, we might want to put a link to bug tickets regarding the stuff that doesn't yet work, like the `package` stuff

Added in [#1396](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1396) by [@lwronski](https://github.com/lwronski)

## `--python` option for `repl` sub-command (experimental)

> Passing `--python` option allows using ScalaPy with `repl`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Passing the `--python` option allows using `ScalaPy` with the `repl` sub-command:
```

```
▶ scala-cli --python

> Welcome to Scala 3.1.3 (17.0.2, Java OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM).

Reviewer: NIT hmmm... shouldn't it run `3.2.0` by default?

Type in expressions for evaluation. Or try :help.
                                                                                
scala> import me.shadaj.scalapy.py
                                                                                
scala> py.Dynamic.global.range(1, 4)
val res0: me.shadaj.scalapy.py.Dynamic = range(1, 4)
```

Added in [#1336](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1336) by [@alexarchambault](https://github.com/alexarchambault)

## `-d`, `-classpath` and `compile` sub-command's `--output` options changes

> To be backward compatible with `scala` command a lot of changes have been made to the following options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be backward compatible with the `scala` command, some changes have been made to the following options:
```

> * The `compile`'s  `--output` option has been renamed to `--compilation-output`. This option is now also available from the `run` and `package` sub-commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `compile` sub-command's  `--output` option has been renamed to `--compilation-output`. This option is now also available from the `run` and `package` sub-commands.
```
can't end with colon here, as that'd somewhat imply the example coming next would have to include using it with the `run` and `package` sub-commands (which I don't think is really necessary)

```
▶ scala-cli compile Hello.scala --compilation-output out
▶ scala-cli --main-class Hello -classpath out
Hello
```

* The `-d` option is no longer an alias for `--dependency`, but for `--compilation-output`. 
  * `-O -d -O path/to/compilation/output` now defaults to `-d path/to/compilation/output`.

```
▶ scala-cli compile Hello.scala -d out
▶ scala-cli --main-class Hello -classpath out
Hello
```

* The old `--classpath` option has been renamed to `--print-classpath`.
  *  `--classpath`, `--class-path` and `-classpath` options are now aliases for the `--extra jars` option.
  * `-O -classpath -O path/to/classpath` now defaults to `--extra-jars path/to/classpath`.

```
▶ scala-cli compile --print-classpath Hello.scala

> # /work/.scala/project-cef76d561e/classes:~/Library/Caches/Coursier/v1/https/repo1.maven.org/maven2/org/scala-lang/scala-library/2.12.14/scala-library-2.12.14.jar:~/Library/Caches/ScalaCli/local-repo/0.1.0/org.virtuslab.scala-cli/runner_2.12/0.0.1-SNAPSHOT/jars/runner_2.12.jar:~/Library/Caches/ScalaCli/local-repo/0.1.0/org.virtuslab.scala-cli/stubs/0.0.1-SNAPSHOT/jars/stubs.jar

Reviewer: it'd be better to show an example class path with an up-to date binary of `0.1.15`. (instead of a local dev output with `0.0.1-SNAPSHOT`)
you can produce a mock one locally, or just run `scala-cli compile Hello.scala --classpath` with `0.1.14` and change the versions in the output manually.

```

Added in [#1340](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1340) by [@Gedochao](https://github.com/Gedochao)

## Make inputs optional when `-classpath` and `--main-class` are passed

> Following changes have been made to be backward compatible with `scala` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following changes have been made to improve backward compatibility with the `scala` command:
```
(we're not quite backward compatible just yet)

> * Passing `--main-class` along with `-classpath`  to the default command now defaults to `run` instead of `repl`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Passing the `--main-class` option along with `-classpath` to the default command now defaults to `run` instead of `repl`:
```

```
▶ scala-cli --main-class Hello -classpath out
Hello
```

* If the `run` sub-command is passed explicitly, it's sufficient to have a main class on the classpath (inputs aren't necessary then):

```
▶ scala-cli compile Hello.scala -d out
▶ scala-cli run -classpath out 
Hello
```

Added in [#1369](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1369) by [@Gedochao](https://github.com/Gedochao)

> ## Debugging for `run` and `test` sub-commands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Debugging with the `run` and `test` sub-commands
```

It is now possible to debug code ran by `run` and `test` sub-commands:

```
▶ scala-cli Main.scala --debug
Listening for transport dt_socket at address: 5005
Hello
```

This addresses [#1212](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/issues/1212)

Added in [#1389](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1389) by [@wleczny](https://github.com/wleczny)

## `--platform` option

> This option can be used to choose the platform, which should be used to compile and run application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option can be used to choose the platform, which should be used to compile and run the application.
```

Reviewer: might also want to mention that `--platform js` is an alias for `--js` and `--platform native` for `--native`.
